There was no answer.

"Father, are you there?" called the voice, more insistently.

From one of the bunks came a slight stir and a murmured word. At the
sound the boy at the door leaped softly into the room and hurried to
the bunk in the corner. He was a slender lad with short, crisp curls at
his ears, and the red of perfect health in his cheeks. His hands, slim,
long, and with tapering fingers like a girl's, reached forward eagerly.

"Daddy, come! I've done the bacon all myself, and the potatoes and the
coffee, too. Quick, it's all getting cold!"

Slowly, with the aid of the boy's firm hands, the man pulled himself
half to a sitting posture. His cheeks, like the boy's, were red--but
not with health. His eyes were a little wild, but his voice was low and
very tender, like a caress.

"David--it's my little son David!"

"Of course it's David! Who else should it be?" laughed the boy. "Come!"
And he tugged at the man's hands.

The man rose then, unsteadily, and by sheer will forced himself to
stand upright. The wild look left his eyes, and the flush his cheeks.
His face looked suddenly old and haggard. Yet with fairly sure steps he
crossed the room and entered the little kitchen.

Half of the bacon was black; the other half was transparent and like
tough jelly. The potatoes were soggy, and had the unmistakable taste
that comes from a dish that has boiled dry. The coffee was lukewarm and
muddy. Even the milk was sour.

David laughed a little ruefully.

"Things aren't so nice as yours, father," he apologized. "I'm afraid
I'm nothing but a discord in that orchestra to-day! Somehow, some of
the stove was hotter than the rest, and burnt up the bacon in spots;
and all the water got out of the potatoes, too,--though THAT didn't
matter, for I just put more cold in. I forgot and left the milk in the
sun, and it tastes bad now; but I'm sure next time it'll be better--all
of it."

The man smiled, but he shook his head sadly.
